# ![](/assets/images/language_icons/python_50px.svg) Background Callbacks

> Support for background callbacks on `@dash.callback` was introduced in Dash
> 2.6. If you're using an earlier version of Dash 2.x, you can use
> [`long_callback`](/long-callbacks) for long-running callbacks.

> To get the most out of this page, make sure you've read about [Basic
> Callbacks](/basic-callbacks) in the Dash Fundamentals.

Most web servers have a 30 second timeout by default, which is an issue for
callbacks that take longer to complete. While you can increase the timeout on
the web server, you risk allowing long-running callbacks to use all of your
app's workers, preventing other requests from going through. Background
callbacks offer a scalable solution for using long-running callbacks by
running them in a separate background queue. In the background queue, the
callbacks are executed one-by-one in the order that they came in by dedicated
queue worker(s).

You can configure a callback to run in the background by setting
`background=True` on the callback. Callbacks with `background=True` use a
backend configured by you to run the callback logic. There are currently two
options:

  * A [DiskCache](http://www.grantjenks.com/docs/diskcache/index.html) backend that runs callback logic in a separate process and stores the results to disk using the `diskcache` library. This is the easiest backend to use for local development, but is **not recommended for production**.

  * A [Celery](https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/getting-started/introduction.html) backend that runs callback logic in a Celery worker and returns results to the Dash app through a Celery broker like [Redis](https://redis.io/). This is recommended for production as, unlike Disk Cache, it queues the background callbacks, running them one-by-one in the order that they were received by dedicated Celery worker(s). Celery is a widely adopted, production-ready job queue library. For further information on the benefits of job queues, see the **Why Job Queues?** section below.

> [Dash Enterprise](http://plotly.com/dash) makes it easy to deploy Celery and
> Redis for using background callbacks in production. [Get
> Pricing](https://plotly.com/get-
> pricing/?utm_medium=dash_docs&utm_content=background-callbacks) or see Dash
> in action at our next [demo session](https://plotly.com/get-
> demo/?utm_medium=dash_docs&utm_content=background-callbacks).

## Getting Started

The following examples use the `diskcache` manager when running locally.
Install with:

    
    
    pip install dash[diskcache]

When these examples are deployed to Dash Enterprise, they use `celery`.

    
    
    pip install dash[celery]

## Basic Steps

To use a background callback, you first need to configure a `manager` using
your chosen backend. The `@dash.callback` decorator requires this manager
instance. You can provide the manager instance to the `dash.Dash` app
constructor as the `background_callback_manager` keyword argument, or as the
`manager` argument to the `@dash.callback` decorator.

In the next five examples, we'll discuss in more detail how to implement
background callbacks.

## Example 1: Simple Example

Here is a simple example of a background callback that updates an `html.P`
element with the number of times that a button has been clicked. The callback
uses `time.sleep` to simulate a long-running operation.

 __

    
    
     import time
    import os
    
    from dash import Dash, DiskcacheManager, CeleryManager, Input, Output, html, callback
    
    if 'REDIS_URL' in os.environ:
        # Use Redis & Celery if REDIS_URL set as an env variable
        from celery import Celery
        celery_app = Celery(__name__, broker=os.environ['REDIS_URL'], backend=os.environ['REDIS_URL'])
        background_callback_manager = CeleryManager(celery_app)
    
    else:
        # Diskcache for non-production apps when developing locally
        import diskcache
        cache = diskcache.Cache("./cache")
        background_callback_manager = DiskcacheManager(cache)
    
    app = Dash(__name__)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Div([html.P(id="paragraph_id", children=["Button not clicked"])]),
            html.Button(id="button_id", children="Run Job!"),
        ]
    )
    
    @callback(
        output=Output("paragraph_id", "children"),
        inputs=Input("button_id", "n_clicks"),
        background=True,
        manager=background_callback_manager,
    )
    def update_clicks(n_clicks):
        time.sleep(2.0)
        return [f"Clicked {n_clicks} times"]
    
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Simple example](./assets/images/long-callbacks/long-callbacks-example-1.gif)

## Example 2: Disable Button While Callback Is Running

Notice how in the previous example, there is no visual indication that the
background callback is running. A user might click the "Run Job!" button
multiple times before the original job can complete. You can also disable the
button while the callback is running and re-enable it when the callback
completes.

To do this, use the `running` argument to `@dash.callback`. This argument
accepts a list of 3-element tuples. The first element of each tuple must be an
`Output` dependency object referencing a property of a component in the app
layout. The second element is the value that the property should be set to
while the callback is running, and the third element is the value the property
should be set to when the callback completes.

This example uses `running` to set the `disabled` property of the button to
`True` while the callback is running, and `False` when it completes.

Note: In this example, the `background_callback_manager` is provided to the
`dash.Dash` app constructor instead of the `@dash.callback` decorator.

 __

    
    
     import time
    import os
    
    from dash import Dash, DiskcacheManager, CeleryManager, Input, Output, html, callback
    
    if 'REDIS_URL' in os.environ:
        # Use Redis & Celery if REDIS_URL set as an env variable
        from celery import Celery
        celery_app = Celery(__name__, broker=os.environ['REDIS_URL'], backend=os.environ['REDIS_URL'])
        background_callback_manager = CeleryManager(celery_app)
    
    else:
        # Diskcache for non-production apps when developing locally
        import diskcache
        cache = diskcache.Cache("./cache")
        background_callback_manager = DiskcacheManager(cache)
    
    app = Dash(__name__, background_callback_manager=background_callback_manager)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Div([html.P(id="paragraph_id", children=["Button not clicked"])]),
            html.Button(id="button_id", children="Run Job!"),
        ]
    )
    
    @callback(
        output=Output("paragraph_id", "children"),
        inputs=Input("button_id", "n_clicks"),
        background=True,
        running=[
            (Output("button_id", "disabled"), True, False),
        ],
    )
    def update_clicks(n_clicks):
        time.sleep(2.0)
        return [f"Clicked {n_clicks} times"]
    
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Disable button while callback is running example](./assets/images/long-
callbacks/long-callbacks-example-2.gif)

## Example 3: Cancelable Callback

This example builds on the previous example, adding support for canceling a
long-running callback using the `cancel` argument to the `@dash.callback`
decorator. We set the `cancel` argument to a list of `Input` dependency
objects that reference a property of a component in the app's layout. When the
value of this property changes while a callback is running, the callback is
canceled. Note that the value of the property is not significant â€” any change
in value cancels the running job (if any).

 __

    
    
     import time
    import os
    
    from dash import Dash, DiskcacheManager, CeleryManager, Input, Output, html, callback
    
    if 'REDIS_URL' in os.environ:
        # Use Redis & Celery if REDIS_URL set as an env variable
        from celery import Celery
        celery_app = Celery(__name__, broker=os.environ['REDIS_URL'], backend=os.environ['REDIS_URL'])
        background_callback_manager = CeleryManager(celery_app)
    
    else:
        # Diskcache for non-production apps when developing locally
        import diskcache
        cache = diskcache.Cache("./cache")
        background_callback_manager = DiskcacheManager(cache)
    
    app = Dash(__name__, background_callback_manager=background_callback_manager)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Div([html.P(id="paragraph_id", children=["Button not clicked"])]),
            html.Button(id="button_id", children="Run Job!"),
            html.Button(id="cancel_button_id", children="Cancel Running Job!"),
        ]
    )
    
    @callback(
        output=Output("paragraph_id", "children"),
        inputs=Input("button_id", "n_clicks"),
        background=True,
        running=[
            (Output("button_id", "disabled"), True, False),
            (Output("cancel_button_id", "disabled"), False, True),
        ],
        cancel=[Input("cancel_button_id", "n_clicks")],
    )
    def update_clicks(n_clicks):
        time.sleep(2.0)
        return [f"Clicked {n_clicks} times"]
    
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Cancelable callback example](./assets/images/long-callbacks/long-callbacks-
example-3.gif)

## Example 4: Progress Bar

This example uses the `progress` argument to the `@dash.callback` decorator to
update a progress bar while the callback is running. We set the `progress`
argument to an `Output` dependency grouping that references properties of
components in the app's layout.

When a dependency grouping is assigned to the `progress` argument of
`@dash.callback`, the decorated function is called with a new special argument
as the first argument to the function. This special argument, named
`set_progress` in the example below, is a function handle that the decorated
function calls in order to provide updates to the app on its current progress.
The `set_progress` function accepts a single argument, which corresponds to
the grouping of properties specified in the `Output` dependency grouping
passed to the `progress` argument of `@dash.callback`.

 __

    
    
     import time
    import os
    
    from dash import Dash, DiskcacheManager, CeleryManager, Input, Output, html, callback
    
    if 'REDIS_URL' in os.environ:
        # Use Redis & Celery if REDIS_URL set as an env variable
        from celery import Celery
        celery_app = Celery(__name__, broker=os.environ['REDIS_URL'], backend=os.environ['REDIS_URL'])
        background_callback_manager = CeleryManager(celery_app)
    
    else:
        # Diskcache for non-production apps when developing locally
        import diskcache
        cache = diskcache.Cache("./cache")
        background_callback_manager = DiskcacheManager(cache)
    
    app = Dash(__name__, background_callback_manager=background_callback_manager)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Div(
                [
                    html.P(id="paragraph_id", children=["Button not clicked"]),
                    html.Progress(id="progress_bar", value="0"),
                ]
            ),
            html.Button(id="button_id", children="Run Job!"),
            html.Button(id="cancel_button_id", children="Cancel Running Job!"),
        ]
    )
    
    @callback(
        output=Output("paragraph_id", "children"),
        inputs=Input("button_id", "n_clicks"),
        background=True,
        running=[
            (Output("button_id", "disabled"), True, False),
            (Output("cancel_button_id", "disabled"), False, True),
            (
                Output("paragraph_id", "style"),
                {"visibility": "hidden"},
                {"visibility": "visible"},
            ),
            (
                Output("progress_bar", "style"),
                {"visibility": "visible"},
                {"visibility": "hidden"},
            ),
        ],
        cancel=Input("cancel_button_id", "n_clicks"),
        progress=[Output("progress_bar", "value"), Output("progress_bar", "max")],
        prevent_initial_call=True
    )
    def update_progress(set_progress, n_clicks):
        total = 5
        for i in range(total + 1):
            set_progress((str(i), str(total)))
            time.sleep(1)
    
        return f"Clicked {n_clicks} times"
    
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Progress bar example](./assets/images/long-callbacks/long-callbacks-
example-4.gif)

## Example 5: Progress Bar Chart Graph

The `progress` argument to the `@dash.callback` decorator can be used to
update arbitrary component properties. This example creates and updates a
Plotly bar graph to display the current calculation status.

This example also uses the `progress_default` argument to specify a grouping
of values that should be assigned to the components specified by the
`progress` argument when the callback is not in progress. If
`progress_default` is not provided, all the dependency properties specified in
`progress` are set to `None` when the callback is not running. In this case,
`progress_default` is set to a figure with a zero width bar.

 __

    
    
     import time
    import os
    
    from dash import Dash, DiskcacheManager, CeleryManager, Input, Output, html, dcc, callback
    import plotly.graph_objects as go
    
    if 'REDIS_URL' in os.environ:
        # Use Redis & Celery if REDIS_URL set as an env variable
        from celery import Celery
        celery_app = Celery(__name__, broker=os.environ['REDIS_URL'], backend=os.environ['REDIS_URL'])
        background_callback_manager = CeleryManager(celery_app)
    
    else:
        # Diskcache for non-production apps when developing locally
        import diskcache
        cache = diskcache.Cache("./cache")
        background_callback_manager = DiskcacheManager(cache)
    
    def make_progress_graph(progress, total):
        progress_graph = (
            go.Figure(data=[go.Bar(x=[progress])])
            .update_xaxes(range=[0, total])
            .update_yaxes(
                showticklabels=False,
            )
            .update_layout(height=100, margin=dict(t=20, b=40))
        )
        return progress_graph
    
    
    app = Dash(__name__, background_callback_manager=background_callback_manager)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Div(
                [
                    html.P(id="paragraph_id", children=["Button not clicked"]),
                    dcc.Graph(id="progress_bar_graph", figure=make_progress_graph(0, 10)),
                ]
            ),
            html.Button(id="button_id", children="Run Job!"),
            html.Button(id="cancel_button_id", children="Cancel Running Job!"),
        ]
    )
    
    @callback(
        output=Output("paragraph_id", "children"),
        inputs=Input("button_id", "n_clicks"),
        background=True,
        running=[
            (Output("button_id", "disabled"), True, False),
            (Output("cancel_button_id", "disabled"), False, True),
            (
                Output("paragraph_id", "style"),
                {"visibility": "hidden"},
                {"visibility": "visible"},
            ),
            (
                Output("progress_bar_graph", "style"),
                {"visibility": "visible"},
                {"visibility": "hidden"},
            ),
        ],
        cancel=[Input("cancel_button_id", "n_clicks")],
        progress=Output("progress_bar_graph", "figure"),
        progress_default=make_progress_graph(0, 10)
    )
    def update_progress(set_progress, n_clicks):
        total = 10
        for i in range(total):
            time.sleep(0.5)
            set_progress(make_progress_graph(i, 10))
    
        return [f"Clicked {n_clicks} times"]
    
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Progress bar chart graph example](./assets/images/long-callbacks/long-
callbacks-example-5.gif)

## Why Job Queues?

When your app is deployed in production, a finite number of CPUs serve
requests for that app. Callbacks that take longer than 30 seconds often
experience timeouts when deployed in production. And even callbacks that take
less than 30 seconds can tie up all available server resources when multiple
users access your app at the same time. When all CPUs are processing
callbacks, new visitors to your app see a blank screen and eventually a
"Server Timed Out" message.

![Example with no job queue](./assets/images/long-
callbacks/long_callbacks_scenario_1.png)

Job queues are a solution to these timeout issues. Like the web processes
serving your Dash app, job queues run with a dedicated number of CPU workers.
These workers go through the jobs one at a time and arenâ€™t subject to
timeouts. While the job queue workers are processing the data, the web
processes serving the Dash app and the regular callbacks display informative
loading screens, progress bars, and the results of the job queues. End users
never see a timeout and always see a responsive app.

![Example with no job queue](./assets/images/long-
callbacks/long_callbacks_scenario_2.png)

## Running in Dash Enterprise Workspaces

To run an app that uses background callbacks with a `celery` backend in a Dash
Enterprise workspace:

  1. Add a [Redis database](/dash-enterprise/redis-database) to your app.
  2. Install Dash with `celery` in the workspace with `pip install dash[celery]`.
  3. In the workspace terminal, run your app with `python app.py`
  4. In a separate workspace terminal, run a `celery` worker. In the code examples above, we declared a `celery` instance with `celery_app = Celery(__name__...)` in an `app.py` file. We reference this in the command to run the worker with `app:celery_app` and also set the number of worker processes with `--concurrency`.
    
        celery -A app:celery_app worker --loglevel=INFO --concurrency=2

> If you make changes to your app's code, you'll need to restart the `celery`
> worker process in the workspace terminal for those changes to apply.

## Deploying to Dash Enterprise

To deploy an app that uses background callbacks with a `celery` backend to
Dash Enterprise:

  1. Add a [Redis database](/dash-enterprise/redis-database) to your app.
  2. Update your app's `requirements.txt` file to include `celery` when installing Dash.
    
        dash[celery]==2.12.1

  3. Add a line to your Procfile to run a `celery` worker. In the code examples above, we declared a `celery` instance with `celery_app = Celery(__name__...)` in an `app.py` file. We reference this in the Procfile with `app:celery_app` and set the number of worker processes with `--concurrency`.
    
        web: gunicorn app:server --workers 4
    queue: celery -A app:celery_app worker --loglevel=INFO --concurrency=2

  4.  _If you're deploying your app to Dash Enterprise 4.x_ , include a DOKKU_SCALE file with the `celery` process:
    
        web=1
    queue=1

  5. [Deploy](/dash-enterprise/deployment) your app.

 **Number of workers**

In production apps, you can tune the number of workers you want to process
your web requests versus process background jobs in the queue using command
line flags in Gunicorn and Celery.

Here is an example of a Procfile with 4 CPUs dedicated to regular Dash
callbacks and 2 CPUs dedicated to processing background callbacks in a queue.

    
    
    web: gunicorn app:server --workers 4
    queue: celery -A app:celery_app worker --loglevel=INFO --concurrency=2

The ratio of Gunicorn web workers to Celery queue workers will depend on your
app. You'll want enough web workers that your app remains responsive to new
users opening your app and enough background queue workers so tasks don't wait
too long in the queue.

If your regular callbacks respond quickly (less than 500ms), consider
configuring fewer web gunicorn workers.

## Background Callbacks vs Long Callbacks

Background callbacks address the following limitations of [long
callbacks](/long-callbacks):

  * You can't access previous results returned by a long callback. This functionality is available in Dash Enterprise's [Snapshot Engine](https://plotly.com/dash/snapshot-engine/?utm_medium=dash_docs&utm_content=background-callbacks).
  * [Pattern-matching dependencies](/pattern-matching-callbacks) are not supported with long callbacks. An error is raised if a callback ID contains `ALL`, `MATCH`, or `ALL_SMALLER`.
  * [`dash.callback_context`](https://dash.plotly.com/advanced-callbacks) is not supported.
  * If the `Input/State/Output` dependencies do not exist when the app starts (if they reference components that are generated by another callback), `suppress_callback_exceptions=True` does not prevent Dash from raising callback validation errors.

It was not possible to fix these issues without introducing backwards
incompatible changes to `long_callback`. So, this feature was re-architected
in a way that fixed these limitations without changing and breaking
`long_callback`.

## Additional Resources

  * [Background Callback Caching](/background-callback-caching)
  * [Introduction to Celery](https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/getting-started/introduction.html)

  * [Redis documentation](https://redis.io/documentation)

  * [DiskCache tutorial](http://www.grantjenks.com/docs/diskcache/tutorial.html)

