# ![](/assets/images/language_icons/python_50px.svg) Advanced Callbacks

> To get the most out of this page, make sure you've read about [Basic
> Callbacks](/basic-callbacks) in the Dash Fundamentals.

## Catching Errors with `PreventUpdate`

In certain situations, you don't want to update the callback output. You can
achieve this by raising a `PreventUpdate` exception in the callback function.

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, Input, Output, callback
    from dash.exceptions import PreventUpdate
    
    external_stylesheets = ['https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css']
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        html.Button('Click here to see the content', id='show-secret'),
        html.Div(id='body-div')
    ])
    
    @callback(
        Output('body-div', 'children'),
        Input('show-secret', 'n_clicks')
    )
    def update_output(n_clicks):
        if n_clicks is None:
            raise PreventUpdate
        else:
            return "Elephants are the only animal that can't jump"
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

Click here to see the content

## Displaying Errors with `dash.no_update`

This example illustrates how you can show an error while keeping the previous
input, using `dash.no_update` to update only some of the callback outputs.

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, callback, no_update
    from dash.exceptions import PreventUpdate
    
    external_stylesheets = ['https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css']
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        html.P('Enter a composite number to see its prime factors'),
        dcc.Input(id='num', type='number', debounce=True, min=2, step=1),
        html.P(id='err', style={'color': 'red'}),
        html.P(id='out')
    ])
    
    @callback(
        Output('out', 'children'),
        Output('err', 'children'),
        Input('num', 'value')
    )
    def show_factors(num):
        if num is None:
            # PreventUpdate prevents ALL outputs updating
            raise PreventUpdate
    
        factors = prime_factors(num)
        if len(factors) == 1:
            # dash.no_update prevents any single output updating
            # (note: it's OK to use for a single-output callback too)
            return no_update, '{} is prime!'.format(num)
    
        return '{} is {}'.format(num, ' * '.join(str(n) for n in factors)), ''
    
    def prime_factors(num):
        n, i, out = num, 2, []
        while i * i <= n:
            if n % i == 0:
                n = int(n / i)
                out.append(i)
            else:
                i += 1 if i == 2 else 2
        out.append(n)
        return out
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

Enter a composite number to see its prime factors

## Determining which `Input` Has Fired with `dash.callback_context`

In addition to event properties like `n_clicks` that change whenever an event
happens (in this case a click), there is a global variable
`dash.callback_context`, available only inside a callback. Using
`dash.callback_context`, you can determine which component/property pairs
triggered a callback.

Below is a summary of properties of `dash.callback_context` outlining the
basics of when to use them. For more detail and examples see [Determining
Which Callback Input Changed](/determining-which-callback-input-changed).

For more examples of minimal Dash apps that use `dash.callback_context`, go to
the community-driven [Example Index](https://dash-example-
index.herokuapp.com/?code=ctx).

### Properties for `callback_context`

> In Dash 2.4 and later, `dash.callback_context` (or `dash.ctx`) has three
> additional properties to make it easier to work with.

  * `triggered_id`: The `id` of the component that triggered the callback.
  * `triggered_prop_ids`: A dictionary of the component ids and props that triggered the callback. Useful when multiple inputs can trigger the callback at the same time, or multiple properties of the same component can trigger the callback.
  * `args_grouping`: A dictionary of the inputs used with flexible callback signatures. The keys are the variable names and the values are dictionaries containing:
    * "id": the component ID. If it’s a pattern matching ID, it will be a dict.
    * "id_str": for pattern matching IDs, it’s the stringified dict ID with no white spaces.
    * "property": the component property used in the callback.
    * "value": the value of the component property at the time the callback was fired.
    * "triggered": a boolean indicating whether this input triggered the callback.

> Dash 2.4 and earlier versions of Dash have the following properties

  * `triggered`: list of all the `Input` props that changed and caused the callback to execute. It is empty when the callback is called on initial load, unless an `Input` prop got its value from another initial callback. Callbacks triggered by user actions typically have one item in `triggered`, unless the same action changes two props at once or the callback has several `Input` props that are all modified by another callback based on a single user action.

>  **More about empty`triggered` lists**: For backward compatibility purposes,
> an empty `triggered` is not really empty. It's falsy so that you can use `if
> triggered` to detect the initial call, but it still has a placeholder
> element so that `ctx.triggered[0]["prop_id"].split(".")` yields a blank ID
> and prop `["", ""]` instead of an error.

  * `inputs` and `states`: allow you to access the callback params by ID and prop instead of through the function args. These have the form of dictionaries `{ 'component_id.prop_name': value }`

  * `outputs_list`, `inputs_list`, and `states_list`: lists of inputs, outputs, and state items arranged as you'll find them in the callback arguments and return value. This is mostly useful for [pattern-matching callbacks](/pattern-matching-callbacks).
  * `response`: The HTTP response object being constructed, useful for changing cookies.
  * `record_timing`: a method to report granular timing information, to be seen in the [Dev Tools](/devtools).

Here's an example of how this can be done:

 __

    
    
     import json
    from dash import Dash, html, Input, Output, callback, ctx
    
    app = Dash(__name__)
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        html.Button('Button 1', id='btn-1'),
        html.Button('Button 2', id='btn-2'),
        html.Button('Button 3', id='btn-3'),
        html.Div(id='container')
    ])
    
    
    @callback(Output('container', 'children'),
                  Input('btn-1', 'n_clicks'),
                  Input('btn-2', 'n_clicks'),
                  Input('btn-3', 'n_clicks'))
    def display(btn1, btn2, btn3):
        button_id = ctx.triggered_id if not None else 'No clicks yet'
    
        ctx_msg = json.dumps({
            'states': ctx.states,
            'triggered': ctx.triggered,
            'inputs': ctx.inputs
        }, indent=2)
    
        return html.Div([
            html.Table([
                html.Tr([html.Th('Button 1'),
                         html.Th('Button 2'),
                         html.Th('Button 3'),
                         html.Th('Most Recent Click')]),
                html.Tr([html.Td(btn1 or 0),
                         html.Td(btn2 or 0),
                         html.Td(btn3 or 0),
                         html.Td(button_id)])
            ]),
            html.Pre(ctx_msg)
        ])
    
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

Button 1Button 2Button 3

Button 1| Button 2| Button 3| Most Recent Click  
---|---|---|---  
0| 0| 0|  
      
    
    {
      "states": {},
      "triggered": [],
      "inputs": {
        "btn-1.n_clicks": null,
        "btn-2.n_clicks": null,
        "btn-3.n_clicks": null
      }
    }

### Legacy Behavior: Using Timestamps

Prior to `dash v1.0`, you needed to compare timestamp properties like
`n_clicks_timestamp` to find the most recent click. While existing uses of
`*_timestamp` continue to work for now, this approach is deprecated and may be
removed in a future update. The one exception is `modified_timestamp` from
`dcc.Store`, which is safe to use and is _not_ deprecated.

## Improving Performance with Memoization

Memoization allows you to bypass long computations by storing the results of
function calls.

To better understand how memoization works, let's start with a simple example.

    
    
    import time
    import functools32
    
    @functools32.lru_cache(maxsize=32)
    def slow_function(input):
        time.sleep(10)
        return f'Input was {input}'

Calling `slow_function('test')` the first time will take 10 seconds. Calling
it a second time with the same argument will take almost no time since the
previously computed result was saved in memory and reused.

The [Performance](/performance) section of the Dash docs delves a little
deeper into leveraging multiple processes and threads in conjunction with
memoization to further improve performance.

 **Sign up for Dash Club** → Two free cheat sheets plus updates from Chris
Parmer and Adam Schroeder delivered to your inbox every two months. Includes
tips and tricks, community apps, and deep dives into the Dash architecture.
_[Join now](https://go.plotly.com/dash-
club?utm_medium=dash_docs&utm_content=advanced-callbacks)_.

## When Are Callbacks Executed?

This section describes the circumstances under which the `dash-renderer`
front-end client can make a request to the Dash back-end server (or the
clientside callback code) to execute a callback function.

### When a Dash App First Loads

All of the callbacks in a Dash app are executed with the initial value of
their inputs when the app is first loaded. This is known as the "initial call"
of the callback. To learn how to suppress this behavior, see the documentation
for the `prevent_initial_call` attribute of Dash callbacks.

It is important to note that when a Dash app is initially loaded in a web
browser by the `dash-renderer` front-end client, its entire callback chain is
introspected recursively.

This allows the `dash-renderer` to predict the order in which callbacks will
need to be executed, as callbacks are blocked when their inputs are outputs of
other callbacks which have not yet fired. In order to unblock the execution of
these callbacks, first callbacks whose inputs are immediately available must
be executed. This process helps the `dash-renderer` to minimize the time and
effort it uses, and avoid unnecessarily redrawing the page, by making sure it
only requests that a callback is executed when all of the callback's inputs
have reached their final values.

Examine the following Dash app:

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, Input, Output, callback
    
    app = Dash()
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Button("execute callback", id="button_1"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="first_output_1"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="second_output_1"),
        ]
    )
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("first_output_1", "children"),
        Output("second_output_1", "children"),
        Input("button_1", "n_clicks")
    )
    def change_text(n_clicks):
        return ["n_clicks is " + str(n_clicks), "n_clicks is " + str(n_clicks)]
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

execute callback

n_clicks is None

n_clicks is None

Notice that when this app is finished being loaded by a web browser and ready
for user interaction, the `html.Div` components do not say "callback not
executed" as declared in the app's layout, but rather "n_clicks is None" as
the result of the `change_text()` callback being executed. This is because the
"initial call" of the callback occurred with `n_clicks` having the value of
`None`.

### As a Direct Result of User Interaction

Most frequently, callbacks are executed as a direct result of user
interaction, such as clicking a button or selecting an item in a dropdown
menu. When such interactions occur, Dash components communicate their new
values to the `dash-renderer` front-end client, which then requests that the
Dash server execute any callback function that has the newly changed value as
input.

If a Dash app has multiple callbacks, the `dash-renderer` requests callbacks
to be executed based on whether or not they can be immediately executed with
the newly changed inputs. If several inputs change simultaneously, then
requests are made to execute them all.

Whether or not these requests are executed in a synchronous or asynchronous
manner depends on the specific setup of the Dash back-end server. If it is
running in a multi-threaded environment, then all of the callbacks can be
executed simultaneously, and they will return values based on their speed of
execution. In a single-threaded environment however, callbacks will be
executed one at a time in the order they are received by the server.

In the example application above, clicking the button results in the callback
being executed.

### As an Indirect Result of User Interaction

When a user interacts with a component, the resulting callback might have
outputs that are themselves the input of other callbacks. The `dash-renderer`
will block the execution of such a callback until the callback whose output is
its input has been executed.

Take the following Dash app:

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, Input, Output, callback
    
    from datetime import datetime
    import time
    
    app = Dash()
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Button("execute fast callback", id="button_3"),
            html.Button("execute slow callback", id="button_4"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="first_output_3"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="second_output_3"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="third_output_3"),
        ]
    )
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("first_output_3", "children"),
        Input("button_3", "n_clicks"))
    def first_callback(n):
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return "in the fast callback it is " + current_time
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("second_output_3", "children"), Input("button_4", "n_clicks"))
    def second_callback(n):
        time.sleep(5)
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return "in the slow callback it is " + current_time
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("third_output_3", "children"),
        Input("first_output_3", "children"),
        Input("second_output_3", "children"))
    def third_callback(n, m):
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return "in the third callback it is " + current_time
    
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

execute fast callbackexecute slow callback

in the fast callback it is 07:13:56

in the slow callback it is 07:14:01

in the third callback it is 07:14:01

The above Dash app demonstrates how callbacks chain together. Notice that if
you first click "execute slow callback" and then click "execute fast
callback", the third callback is not executed until after the slow callback
finishes executing. This is because the third callback has the second
callback's output as its input, which lets the `dash-renderer` know that it
should delay its execution until after the second callback finishes.

### When Dash Components Are Added to the Layout

It is possible for a callback to insert new Dash components into a Dash app's
layout. If these new components are themselves the inputs to other callback
functions, then their appearance in the Dash app's layout will trigger those
callback functions to be executed.

In this circumstance, it is possible that multiple requests are made to
execute the same callback function. This would occur if the callback in
question has already been requested and its output returned before the new
components which are also its inputs are added to the layout.

## Prevent Callback Execution Upon Initial Component Render

You can use the `prevent_initial_call` attribute to prevent callbacks from
firing when their inputs initially appear in the layout of your Dash
application.

This attribute applies when the layout of your Dash app is initially loaded,
and also when new components are introduced into the layout when a callback
has been triggered.

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, Input, Output, callback
    
    from datetime import datetime
    import time
    
    app = Dash()
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            html.Button("execute callbacks", id="button_2"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="first_output_2"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="second_output_2"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="third_output_2"),
            html.Div(children="callback not executed", id="fourth_output_2"),
        ]
    )
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("first_output_2", "children"),
        Output("second_output_2", "children"),
        Input("button_2", "n_clicks"), prevent_initial_call=True)
    def first_callback(n):
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return ["in the first callback it is " + current_time, "in the first callback it is " + current_time]
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("third_output_2", "children"), Input("second_output_2", "children"), prevent_initial_call=True)
    def second_callback(n):
        time.sleep(2)
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return "in the second callback it is " + current_time
    
    
    @callback(
        Output("fourth_output_2", "children"),
        Input("first_output_2", "children"),
        Input("third_output_2", "children"), prevent_initial_call=True)
    def third_output(n, m):
        time.sleep(2)
        now = datetime.now()
        current_time = now.strftime("%H:%M:%S")
        return "in the third callback it is " + current_time
    
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

execute callbacks

callback not executed

callback not executed

callback not executed

callback not executed

However, the above behavior only applies if both the callback output and input
are present in the app layout upon initial load of the application.

It is important to note that `prevent_initial_call` will not prevent a
callback from firing in the case where the callback's input is inserted into
the layout as the result of another callback after the app initially loads
**unless the output is inserted alongside that input**!

In other words, if the output of the callback is already present in the app
layout before its input is inserted into the layout, `prevent_initial_call`
will not prevent its execution when the input is first inserted into the
layout.

Consider the following example:

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, callback
    
    app = Dash(__name__, suppress_callback_exceptions=True)
    server = app.server
    app.layout = html.Div([
        dcc.Location(id='url'),
        html.Div(id='layout-div'),
        html.Div(id='content')
    ])
    
    @callback(Output('content', 'children'), Input('url', 'pathname'))
    def display_page(pathname):
        return html.Div([
            dcc.Input(id='input', value='hello world'),
            html.Div(id='output')
        ])
    
    @callback(Output('output', 'children'), Input('input', 'value'), prevent_initial_call=True)
    def update_output(value):
        print('>>> update_output')
        return value
    
    @callback(Output('layout-div', 'children'), Input('input', 'value'), prevent_initial_call=True)
    def update_layout_div(value):
        print('>>> update_layout_div')
        return value

In this case, `prevent_initial_call` will prevent the `update_output()`
callback from firing when its input is first inserted into the app layout as a
result of the `display_page()` callback. This is because both the input and
output of the callback are already contained within the app layout when the
callback executes.

However, because the app layout contains only the output of the callback, and
not its input, `prevent_initial_call` will not prevent the
`update_layout_div()` callback from firing. Since
`suppress_callback_exceptions=True` is specified here, Dash has to assume that
the input is present in the app layout when the app is initialized. From the
perspective of the output element in this example, the new input component is
handled as if an existing input had been provided a new value, rather than
treating it as initially rendered.

## Circular Callbacks

As of `dash v1.19.0`, you can create circular updates _within the same
callback_.

Circular callback chains that involve multiple callbacks are not supported.

Circular callbacks can be used to keep multiple inputs synchronized to each
other.

### Synchronizing a Slider with a Text Input Example

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, dcc, Input, Output, callback, ctx
    
    external_stylesheets = ["https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css"]
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            dcc.Slider(
                id="slider-circular", min=0, max=20,
                marks={i: str(i) for i in range(21)},
                value=3
            ),
            dcc.Input(
                id="input-circular", type="number", min=0, max=20, value=3
            ),
        ]
    )
    @callback(
        Output("input-circular", "value"),
        Output("slider-circular", "value"),
        Input("input-circular", "value"),
        Input("slider-circular", "value"),
    )
    def callback(input_value, slider_value):
        trigger_id = ctx.triggered[0]["prop_id"].split(".")[0]
        value = input_value if trigger_id == "input-circular" else slider_value
        return value, value
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

01234567891011121314151617181920

### Displaying Two Inputs with Different Units Example

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, html, dcc, Input, Output, callback, ctx
    
    external_stylesheets = ["https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css"]
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        html.Div('Convert Temperature'),
        'Celsius',
        dcc.Input(
            id="celsius",
            value=0.0,
            type="number"
        ),
        ' = Fahrenheit',
        dcc.Input(
            id="fahrenheit",
            value=32.0,
            type="number",
        ),
    ])
    
    @callback(
        Output("celsius", "value"),
        Output("fahrenheit", "value"),
        Input("celsius", "value"),
        Input("fahrenheit", "value"),
    )
    def sync_input(celsius, fahrenheit):
        input_id = ctx.triggered[0]["prop_id"].split(".")[0]
        if input_id == "celsius":
            fahrenheit= None if celsius is None else (float(celsius) * 9/5) + 32
        else:
            celsius = None if fahrenheit is None else (float(fahrenheit) - 32) * 5/9
        return celsius, fahrenheit
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

Convert Temperature

Celsius = Fahrenheit

### Synchronizing Two Checklists

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, callback, callback_context
    
    external_stylesheets = ["https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css"]
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    options = ["New York City", "Montréal", "San Francisco"]
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            dcc.Checklist(["All"], [], id="all-checklist", inline=True),
            dcc.Checklist(options, [], id="city-checklist", inline=True),
        ]
    )
    @callback(
        Output("city-checklist", "value"),
        Output("all-checklist", "value"),
        Input("city-checklist", "value"),
        Input("all-checklist", "value"),
    )
    def sync_checklists(cities_selected, all_selected):
        ctx = callback_context
        input_id = ctx.triggered[0]["prop_id"].split(".")[0]
        if input_id == "city-checklist":
            all_selected = ["All"] if set(cities_selected) == set(options) else []
        else:
            cities_selected = options if all_selected else []
        return cities_selected, all_selected
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

All

New York CityMontréalSan Francisco

