# ![](/assets/images/language_icons/python_50px.svg) Clientside Callbacks

> To get the most out of this page, make sure you've read about [Basic
> Callbacks](/basic-callbacks) in the Dash Fundamentals.

Sometimes callbacks can incur a significant overhead, especially when they:

  * receive and/or return very large quantities of data (transfer time)
  * are called very often (network latency, queuing, handshake)
  * are part of a callback chain that requires multiple roundtrips between the browser and Dash

When the overhead cost of a callback becomes too great and no other
optimization is possible, the callback can be modified to be run directly in
the browser instead of a making a request to Dash.

The syntax for the callback is almost exactly the same; you use `Input` and
`Output` as you normally would when declaring a callback, but you also define
a JavaScript function as the first argument to the `@callback` decorator.

For example, the following callback:

    
    
    @callback(
        Output('out-component', 'value'),
        Input('in-component1', 'value'),
        Input('in-component2', 'value')
    )
    def large_params_function(largeValue1, largeValue2):
        largeValueOutput = someTransform(largeValue1, largeValue2)
    
        return largeValueOutput

* * *

Can be rewritten to use JavaScript like so:

    
    
    from dash import clientside_callback, Input, Output
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        function(largeValue1, largeValue2) {
            return someTransform(largeValue1, largeValue2);
        }
        """,
        Output('out-component', 'value'),
        Input('in-component1', 'value'),
        Input('in-component2', 'value')
    )

* * *

You also have the option of defining the function in a `.js` file in your
`assets/` folder. To achieve the same result as the code above, the contents
of the `.js` file would look like this:

    
    
    window.dash_clientside = Object.assign({}, window.dash_clientside, {
        clientside: {
            large_params_function: function(largeValue1, largeValue2) {
                return someTransform(largeValue1, largeValue2);
            }
        }
    });

* * *

In Dash, the callback would now be written as:

    
    
    from dash import clientside_callback, ClientsideFunction, Input, Output
    
    clientside_callback(
        ClientsideFunction(
            namespace='clientside',
            function_name='large_params_function'
        ),
        Output('out-component', 'value'),
        Input('in-component1', 'value'),
        Input('in-component2', 'value')
    )

* * *

## A Simple Example

Below are two examples of using clientside callbacks to update a graph in
conjunction with a `dcc.Store` component. In these examples, we update a
`dcc.Store` component on the backend; to create and display the graph, we have
a clientside callback in the frontend that adds some extra information about
the layout that we specify using the radio buttons under "Graph scale".

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, callback, clientside_callback
    import pandas as pd
    
    import json
    
    external_stylesheets = ['https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css']
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    df = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/gapminderDataFiveYear.csv')
    
    available_countries = df['country'].unique()
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        dcc.Graph(
            id='clientside-graph'
        ),
        dcc.Store(
            id='clientside-figure-store',
            data=[{
                'x': df[df['country'] == 'Canada']['year'],
                'y': df[df['country'] == 'Canada']['pop']
            }]
        ),
        'Indicator',
        dcc.Dropdown(
            {'pop' : 'Population', 'lifeExp': 'Life Expectancy', 'gdpPercap': 'GDP per Capita'},
            'pop',
            id='clientside-graph-indicator'
        ),
        'Country',
        dcc.Dropdown(available_countries, 'Canada', id='clientside-graph-country'),
        'Graph scale',
        dcc.RadioItems(
            ['linear', 'log'],
            'linear',
            id='clientside-graph-scale'
        ),
        html.Hr(),
        html.Details([
            html.Summary('Contents of figure storage'),
            dcc.Markdown(
                id='clientside-figure-json'
            )
        ])
    ])
    
    
    @callback(
        Output('clientside-figure-store', 'data'),
        Input('clientside-graph-indicator', 'value'),
        Input('clientside-graph-country', 'value')
    )
    def update_store_data(indicator, country):
        dff = df[df['country'] == country]
        return [{
            'x': dff['year'],
            'y': dff[indicator],
            'mode': 'markers'
        }]
    
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        function(data, scale) {
            return {
                'data': data,
                'layout': {
                     'yaxis': {'type': scale}
                 }
            }
        }
        """,
        Output('clientside-graph', 'figure'),
        Input('clientside-figure-store', 'data'),
        Input('clientside-graph-scale', 'value')
    )
    
    
    @callback(
        Output('clientside-figure-json', 'children'),
        Input('clientside-figure-store', 'data')
    )
    def generated_figure_json(data):
        return '```\n'+json.dumps(data, indent=2)+'\n```'
    
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

195019601970198019902000201015M20M25M30M

[ plotly-logomark ](https://plotly.com/)

Indicator

Population

×

Country

Canada

×

Graph scale

linearlog

* * *

Contents of figure storage

    
    
    [
      {
        "x": [
          1952,
          1957,
          1962,
          1967,
          1972,
          1977,
          1982,
          1987,
          1992,
          1997,
          2002,
          2007
        ],
        "y": [
          14785584,
          17010154,
          18985849,
          20819767,
          22284500,
          23796400,
          25201900,
          26549700,
          28523502,
          30305843,
          31902268,
          33390141
        ],
        "mode": "markers"
      }
    ]

Note that, in this example, we are manually creating the `figure` dictionary
by extracting the relevant data from the dataframe. This is what gets stored
in our `dcc.Store` component; expand the "Contents of figure storage" above to
see exactly what is used to construct the graph.

## Using Plotly Express to Generate a Figure

Plotly Express enables you to create one-line declarations of figures. When
you create a graph with, for example, `plotly_express.Scatter`, you get a
dictionary as a return value. This dictionary is in the same shape as the
`figure` argument to a `dcc.Graph` component. (See
[here](https://plotly.com/python/creating-and-updating-figures/) for more
information about the shape of `figure`s.)

We can rework the example above to use Plotly Express.

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, callback, clientside_callback
    import pandas as pd
    import json
    
    import plotly.express as px
    
    external_stylesheets = ['https://codepen.io/chriddyp/pen/bWLwgP.css']
    
    app = Dash(__name__, external_stylesheets=external_stylesheets)
    
    df = pd.read_csv('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/gapminderDataFiveYear.csv')
    
    available_countries = df['country'].unique()
    
    app.layout = html.Div([
        dcc.Graph(
            id='clientside-graph-px'
        ),
        dcc.Store(
            id='clientside-figure-store-px'
        ),
        'Indicator',
        dcc.Dropdown(
            {'pop' : 'Population', 'lifeExp': 'Life Expectancy', 'gdpPercap': 'GDP per Capita'},
            'pop',
            id='clientside-graph-indicator-px'
        ),
        'Country',
        dcc.Dropdown(available_countries, 'Canada', id='clientside-graph-country-px'),
        'Graph scale',
        dcc.RadioItems(
            ['linear', 'log'],
            'linear',
            id='clientside-graph-scale-px'
        ),
        html.Hr(),
        html.Details([
            html.Summary('Contents of figure storage'),
            dcc.Markdown(
                id='clientside-figure-json-px'
            )
        ])
    ])
    
    
    @callback(
        Output('clientside-figure-store-px', 'data'),
        Input('clientside-graph-indicator-px', 'value'),
        Input('clientside-graph-country-px', 'value')
    )
    def update_store_data(indicator, country):
        dff = df[df['country'] == country]
        return px.scatter(dff, x='year', y=str(indicator))
    
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        function(figure, scale) {
            if(figure === undefined) {
                return {'data': [], 'layout': {}};
            }
            const fig = Object.assign({}, figure, {
                'layout': {
                    ...figure.layout,
                    'yaxis': {
                        ...figure.layout.yaxis, type: scale
                    }
                 }
            });
            return fig;
        }
        """,
        Output('clientside-graph-px', 'figure'),
        Input('clientside-figure-store-px', 'data'),
        Input('clientside-graph-scale-px', 'value')
    )
    
    
    @callback(
        Output('clientside-figure-json-px', 'children'),
        Input('clientside-figure-store-px', 'data')
    )
    def generated_px_figure_json(data):
        return '```\n'+json.dumps(data, indent=2)+'\n```'
    
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)

195019601970198019902000201015M20M25M30M

yearpop

[ plotly-logomark ](https://plotly.com/)

Indicator

Population

×

Country

Canada

×

Graph scale

linearlog

* * *

Contents of figure storage

    
    
    {
      "data": [
        {
          "hovertemplate": "year=%{x}<br>pop=%{y}<extra></extra>",
          "legendgroup": "",
          "marker": {
            "color": "var(--colorway-0)",
            "symbol": "circle"
          },
          "mode": "markers",
          "name": "",
          "orientation": "v",
          "showlegend": false,
          "x": [
            1952,
            1957,
            1962,
            1967,
            1972,
            1977,
            1982,
            1987,
            1992,
            1997,
            2002,
            2007
          ],
          "xaxis": "x",
          "y": [
            14785584,
            17010154,
            18985849,
            20819767,
            22284500,
            23796400,
            25201900,
            26549700,
            28523502,
            30305843,
            31902268,
            33390141
          ],
          "yaxis": "y",
          "type": "scatter"
        }
      ],
      "layout": {
        "template": {
          "layout": {
            "colorscale": {
              "sequential": [
                [
                  0,
                  "var(--colorscale-0)"
                ],
                [
                  0.1111111111111111,
                  "var(--colorscale-1)"
                ],
                [
                  0.2222222222222222,
                  "var(--colorscale-2)"
                ],
                [
                  0.3333333333333333,
                  "var(--colorscale-3)"
                ],
                [
                  0.4444444444444444,
                  "var(--colorscale-4)"
                ],
                [
                  0.5555555555555556,
                  "var(--colorscale-5)"
                ],
                [
                  0.6666666666666666,
                  "var(--colorscale-6)"
                ],
                [
                  0.7777777777777778,
                  "var(--colorscale-7)"
                ],
                [
                  0.8888888888888888,
                  "var(--colorscale-8)"
                ],
                [
                  1,
                  "var(--colorscale-9)"
                ]
              ]
            },
            "colorway": [
              "var(--colorway-0)",
              "var(--colorway-1)",
              "var(--colorway-2)",
              "var(--colorway-3)",
              "var(--colorway-4)",
              "var(--colorway-5)",
              "var(--colorway-6)",
              "var(--colorway-7)",
              "var(--colorway-8)",
              "var(--colorway-9)"
            ],
            "margin": {
              "t": 0
            }
          }
        },
        "xaxis": {
          "anchor": "y",
          "domain": [
            0,
            1
          ],
          "title": {
            "text": "year"
          }
        },
        "yaxis": {
          "anchor": "x",
          "domain": [
            0,
            1
          ],
          "title": {
            "text": "pop"
          }
        },
        "legend": {
          "tracegroupgap": 0
        }
      }
    }

Again, you can expand the "Contents of figure storage" section above to see
what gets generated. You may notice that this is quite a bit more extensive
than the previous example; in particular, a `layout` is already defined. So,
instead of creating a `layout` as we did previously, we have to mutate the
existing layout in our JavaScript code.

## Clientside Callbacks with Promises

Dash 2.4 and later supports clientside callbacks that return promises.

### Fetching Data Example

In this example, we fetch data (based on the value of the dropdown) using an
async clientside callback function that outputs it to a `dash_table.DataTable`
component.

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, dash_table, clientside_callback
    
    app = Dash(__name__)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            dcc.Dropdown(
                options=[
                    {
                        "label": "Car-sharing data",
                        "value": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/carshare_data.json",
                    },
                    {
                        "label": "Iris data",
                        "value": "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/iris_data.json",
                    },
                ],
                value="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/iris_data.json",
                id="data-select",
            ),
            html.Br(),
            dash_table.DataTable(id="my-table-promises", page_size=10),
        ]
    )
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        async function(value) {
        const response = await fetch(value);
        const data = await response.json();
        return data;
        }
        """,
        Output("my-table-promises", "data"),
        Input("data-select", "value"),
    )
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

Iris data

×

  

sepal length

|

sepal width

|

petal length

|

petal width

|

class  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
5.1

|

3.5

|

1.4

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.9

|

3

|

1.4

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.7

|

3.2

|

1.3

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.6

|

3.1

|

1.5

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
5

|

3.6

|

1.4

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
5.4

|

3.9

|

1.7

|

0.4

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.6

|

3.4

|

1.4

|

0.3

|

Iris-setosa  
  
5

|

3.4

|

1.5

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.4

|

2.9

|

1.4

|

0.2

|

Iris-setosa  
  
4.9

|

3.1

|

1.5

|

0.1

|

Iris-setosa  
  
1

/

15

### Notifications Example

This example uses promises and sends desktop notifications to the user once
they grant permission and select the **Notify** button:

 __

    
    
     from dash import Dash, dcc, html, Input, Output, clientside_callback
    
    app = Dash(__name__)
    
    app.layout = html.Div(
        [
            dcc.Store(id="notification-permission"),
            html.Button("Notify", id="notify-btn"),
            html.Div(id="notification-output"),
        ]
    )
    
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        function() {
            return navigator.permissions.query({name:'notifications'})
        }
        """,
        Output("notification-permission", "data"),
        Input("notify-btn", "n_clicks"),
        prevent_initial_call=True,
    )
    
    clientside_callback(
        """
        function(result) {
            if (result.state == 'granted') {
                new Notification("Dash notification", { body: "Notification already granted!"});
                return null;
            } else if (result.state == 'prompt') {
                return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
                    Notification.requestPermission().then(res => {
                        if (res == 'granted') {
                            new Notification("Dash notification", { body: "Notification granted!"});
                            resolve();
                        } else {
                            reject(`Permission not granted: ${res}`)
                        }
                    })
                });
            } else {
                return result.state;
            }
        }
        """,
        Output("notification-output", "children"),
        Input("notification-permission", "data"),
        prevent_initial_call=True,
    )
    
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.run(debug=True)

![Notification with promises](/assets/images/clientside-
callbacks/notification.gif)

* * *

## Limitations

There are a few limitations to keep in mind:

  1. Clientside callbacks execute on the browser's main thread and will block rendering and events processing while being executed.
  2. Clientside callbacks are not possible if you need to refer to global variables on the server or a DB call is required.
  3. Dash versions prior to 2.4.0 do not support asynchronous clientside callbacks and will fail if a `Promise` is returned.

